 THE CEO of a jewellery brand made history yesterday when she bid R90-million at an auction for a dream villa in Clifton. Clare Wiese put in the highest bid achieved on a residential property in South Africa. The six-bedroom mansion in Nettleton Road — arguably the most exclusive street in the country — was developed by property mogul Stuart Chait who co-founded MvelaProp with Tokyo Sexwale. Sasfin Bank had been a partner. But Chait said the bank considered it “too big exposure on their books” and decided “not to extend the loan”. Chait put the house — with eight bathrooms, a sauna, pool and an elevator — on the market months ago for R150-million. But the bank ordered the auction. He believes they could have achieved a higher price this summer when international buyers are set to prowl for luxury. Or, said Chait, the house could be refinanced and “rented out”. “We were recently offered R3.5-million rental for a two-week period over Christmas and New Year by the CEO of a Fortune 500 company and have had several rental offers at R150000 a day,” said Chait. Lew Geffen, chairman of Lew Geffen Sotheby‘s International Realty, which jointly marketed the mansion, is not surprised at the outcome of the auction, which lasted just a few minutes. “We‘ve seen this time and again that when a trophy home comes onto the market as a distressed property it will always attract the right buyer at the right price,” Geffen said. Wiese is the daughter of the richest man in the country, Christo Wiese. But Clare is an accomplished businesswoman herself and is the founder of contemporary fine jewellery brand Paka Paka. “We are very excited about the purchase. I have lived in Clifton all my life and consider it home,” said Wiese. Joff van Reenen, director and lead auctioneer for The High Street Auction Company, said it is the highest bid achieved on a residential property. The bank has five working days to accept the offer, he said. - The Times Need to stay informed? Published by Tiso Blackstar and distributed 
                with the Financial Mail on the last Thursday
                of every month except December and January.