President Jacob Zuma has warned critics of South Africa and his administration against over-simplifying their analysis and criticism of the challenges facing the country. Zuma said while he was not against criticism‚ he pleaded with his and the country's detractors to stick to the facts‚ also calling for acknowledgement that South Africa was a unique country with an equally unique history in which a white minority oppressed a black majority. Zuma was addressing a crowd of at least 4‚000‚ dressed largely in ANC regalia‚ at a Free State provincial government-sponsored event to close the 16 days of activism campaign against women abuse in Bethlehem. Zuma said there should be honest acknowledgement that much of today's problems have their roots firmly in the past. Emphasising his point about South Africa's uniqueness‚ Zuma told the crowd that even the Constitution‚ which was signed 20 years ago‚ had the unique‚ dual task of addressing the ills of the past while simultaneously improving the current conditions of today's citizens. "We are almost like rebuilding a nation that was devastated by a system [of apartheid]. That is why our constitution is considered the best because it deals with many issues‚ like addressing the problems of the past and improving life today. It is important to make this point because most analysts miss it‚" said Zuma. "If you don't acknowledge that fact‚ then your analysis cannot be correct. Our challenges of today are the challenges of yesterday. All I'm appealing for is that those who talk about South Africa must not forget the facts. These are just facts‚ not arrogance. Just facts of where South Africa comes from." Meanwhile‚ staunch Zuma ally and Premier of the Free State‚ Ace Magushula‚ labelled the president's detractors "artificial leaders". Magashula called on ANC members not to be neutral about moves to have Zuma removed from office before his ANC term ends in December 2017 and prior to the end of his presidential stint in 2019. He said those calling for Zuma to step down behaved as though they did not know the ANC but assured the crowd that "President Zuma knows the ANC". "The president will finish his term. We hear that there are those who are saying he should resign. How‚ because we voted for him as South Africans so that he can finish his term. Those who say Jacob Zuma should resign‚ you do not know them. They have not consulted with you. Even we as comrades. We should stand up and speak. No one should be neutral‚" said Magashula. TMG Digital/The Times Need to stay informed? Published by Tiso Blackstar and distributed 
                with the Financial Mail on the last Thursday
                of every month except December and January.