If you were to take office after Thuli Madonsela, you would be a little awed. Her tenure as public protector single-handedly brought to life the notion of public accountability which had been lying dormant in the constitution for over a decade. She produced reports which were remarkable for their courage, their incisiveness and their legal clarity. But, instead of awe and admiration, the new public protector, Busisiwe Mkhwebane, has expressed disdain for Madonsela. She told MPs that she shared their 'distaste' for the term 'state capture', the subject of Madonsela's final report which is the subject of a court challenge by Zuma and some other guy. She will be doing away with Madonsela's use of consultants and her habit of giving her reports catchy names. In what amounts to a very bad start, the ANC's Mathole Motshekga, the former chief whip who led parliament's disgraceful attempt to cover up Nkandla, siding with Zuma against Madonsela, said he liked her 'refreshing approach'. All of this speaks to the fact that Mkhwebane has either: 1. Failed to appreciate the ground-breaking role her predecessor played in defining how the office of the public protector ought to do its job; or 2. Decided to chart a new path which is less confrontational and more suited to the needs of the predatory elite she is supposed to bring to heel; or 3. Decided she wants to put her own stamp on the office and will, in fact, continue the powerful, independent role carved out by Madonsela. Let's hope that the last answer is the right one. This comment from commentator Judith February: "It is curious that she would deny a stream of funding from donors. It didn't compromise Madonsela's independence. "But, of course, it feeds into the initial discomfort about her (Mkhwebane's) appointment [and] that her state security background might mean she has an instinct to some degree of paranoia," February said. Paranoia, indeed. Mkhwebane was a State Security Agency spy before she took the job. In her world, everything might be a conspiracy to topple the ANC.  Need to stay informed? Published by Tiso Blackstar and distributed 
                with the Financial Mail on the last Thursday
                of every month except December and January.